kci_docs: How to add new rootfs testsuite and how to add LAVA tests (#444)
kernelci/kernelci-core: doc/kci_testsuite.md

> ### Verify your requirement:

Reviewer: Please add a paragraph explaining what this page is all about, i.e. how to add a test suite to KernelCI.

> -  First validate whether you really need to create a new rootfs images? you find existing rootfs variants using

Reviewer: This is not a question.
```suggestion
-  First validate whether you really need to create a new rootfs images. You can find existing rootfs variants using
```

>   `kci_rootfs list_variants`. If those matches your requirement, please make use of it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `kci_rootfs list_variants`. If any of those matches your requirements, please make use of it. 
```

> -  If you want to make minor modification. Then check below options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  If you want to make some minor modification, then check the options below:
```

>      - If you need to install specific Debian package, have look at `extra_packages` option in `rootfs-configs.yaml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - If you need to install some specific Debian packages, have look at `extra_packages` option in `rootfs-configs.yaml` file.
```

>      - To install specific test suite built from source, pep3 etc have a look at `script` option in `rootfs-configs.yml` file. It allows to you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - To install a specific test suite built from source or any arbitrary commands, have a look at the `script` option in `rootfs-configs.yml`. It allows to you
```

        run prepare rootfs image in a desired manner.

>      - To install specific files or helper scripts on specific location, have a look at `overlay` option in `rootfs-configs.yml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - To install arbitrary files such as helper scripts or test input data in some specific locations, have a look at the `overlay` option in `rootfs-configs.yml`.
```

### How to add test suite to a rootfs image

> 1. Let's understand how test suite is added to a rootfs image. For this, we will explore `buster-v4l2` rootfs image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Let's understand how a test suite can be added to a rootfs image. For this, we will explore the `buster-v4l2` rootfs image.
```

> 2. Take a look at `rootfs-configs.yaml` for `buster-v4l2`. It should display following config entries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Take a look at `rootfs-configs.yaml` for `buster-v4l2`. It should display the following config entries:
```

```
  buster-v4l2:
    rootfs_type: debos
    debian_release: buster
    arch_list:
      - amd64
      - arm64
      - armhf
    extra_packages_remove:
      - bash
      - e2fslibs
      - e2fsprogs
    script: "scripts/buster-v4l2.sh"
    test_overlay: "overlays/v4l2"
```

> 3. We will look into last three config entries namely, `extra_packages_remove`, `script` and `test_overlay`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. We will look into last three config entries, namely: `extra_packages_remove`, `script` and `test_overlay`.
```

>    `extra_packages_remove` as name suggests it will remove the listed packages from final rootfs image. In this case,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   `extra_packages_remove` as its name suggests will remove the listed packages from the final rootfs image. In this case,
```

>     packages like bash, e2fslibs and e2fsprogs are deleted from the image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    packages like `bash`, `e2fslibs` and `e2fsprogs` are deleted from the image.
```

> 4. Understand that `script` path is relative to `kci_rootfs build --data-path` value. By default its `jenkins/debian/debos/script`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Understand that `script` path is relative to the `kci_rootfs build --data-path` value. By default this is `jenkins/debian/debos/script`
```

   Lets have quick look at its current contents:

```
$ ls jenkins/debian/debos/scripts/

> buster-cros-ec-tests.sh  buster-igt.sh  buster-v4l2.sh  create_initrd_ramdisk.sh  create_manifest.py  crush.sh  nothing.sh  setup-networking.sh  stretch-ltp.sh  strip.sh

Reviewer: `ls -l` or `ls -1` to show them in a vertical list would be easier to read than a very long line.

```

>    Lets focus on `buster-v4l2.sh` for this example. If you peek into the script you will find that script performs actions like installing packages via apt-get, setting 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Let's focus on `buster-v4l2.sh` for this example. If you peek into the script you will find that it performs actions like installing packages via apt-get, setting 
```

>    up v4l2 build directories and building and installing the v4l2 binaries. Its just a normal bash script not tied to debos or kernelci. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   up v4l2 build directories and building and installing the v4l2 binaries. It's just a normal bash script not tied to debos or KernelCI. 
```

>    if you like to run the `buster-v4l2.sh` script and verify manually, simple copy the script to `debian:buster` docker image and execute it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If you would like to run the `buster-v4l2.sh` script and verify manually, simply copy the script to `debian:buster` docker image and execute it.
```

Reviewer: Well, it's better to provide a command that will start a container, mount the local directory to access the config files and run kci_rootfs inside it.

Author: Resolved other comments. Reg this: In previous line mentioned that the script is generic and not tied to debos or kernelci. so explained that user can test the script `buster-v4l2.sh` in non-kernelci environment. If kci_rootfs usage needs to be explained, may be add a pointer to `doc/kci_rootfs.md` document?

Reviewer: Ah yes sorry, I thought you were referring to a KernelCI Docker image but it's the generic `debian:buster` one - fine.

> 5. `test_overlay` option is used to create specific directory layout inside the rootfs image. In our case, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. The `test_overlay` option is used to create a specific directory layout inside the rootfs image. In our case: 
```

```
$ tree jenkins/debian/debos/overlays/v4l2/
jenkins/debian/debos/overlays/v4l2/
└── usr
    └── bin
        └── v4l2-parser.sh

```

>    `/usr/bin/v4l2-parser.sh` will be available on `buster-v4l2` rootfs image. These overlay scripts normally ran from LAVA job to parse the results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   `/usr/bin/v4l2-parser.sh` will be available in the `buster-v4l2` rootfs image. These overlay scripts are normally run from LAVA job to execute some tests and parse the results.
```

>     [Here](https://lava.collabora.co.uk/scheduler/job/2446126/definition#defline120) is a sample LAVA job using `v4l2-parser.sh`.

Reviewer: Please avoid "here" links
```suggestion
    This sample [LAVA job definition](https://lava.collabora.co.uk/scheduler/job/2446126/definition#defline120) shows how `v4l2-parser.sh` can be used.
```

> 6. Hopefully now you have some basic idea about how test-suite are added to rootfs and how its used in LAVA environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Hopefully now you should have some basic idea about how to add a test suite to a rootfs image and how it can be used in a LAVA environment.
```

strip.sh
```

   Let's focus on `buster-v4l2.sh` for this example. If you peek into the script you will find that it performs actions like installing packages via apt-get, setting
   up v4l2 build directories and building and installing the v4l2 binaries. It's just a normal bash script not tied to debos or KernelCI.

   If you would like to run the `buster-v4l2.sh` script and verify manually, simply copy the script to `debian:buster` docker image and execute it.

5. The `test_overlay` option is used to create a specific directory layout inside the rootfs image. In our case:

```
$ tree jenkins/debian/debos/overlays/v4l2/
jenkins/debian/debos/overlays/v4l2/
└── usr
    └── bin
        └── v4l2-parser.sh

```
   `/usr/bin/v4l2-parser.sh` will be available in the `buster-v4l2` rootfs image. These overlay scripts are normally run from LAVA job to execute some tests and parse the results.
    This sample [LAVA job definition](https://lava.collabora.co.uk/scheduler/job/2446126/definition#defline120) shows how `v4l2-parser.sh` can be used.

6. Hopefully now you should have some basic idea about how to add a test suite to a rootfs and how it can be used in LAVA environment.

> ### How to add new testsuite to a buster rootfs image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How to add a new test suite to a buster rootfs image
```

> For this example, we will be using `btrfs-progs` test-sute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this example, we will be using the `btrfs-progs` test-sute.
```

> 1. Let's first modify `rootfs-configs.yaml` for `buster-btrfs` with appropriate entires. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Let's first modify `rootfs-configs.yaml` to add `buster-btrfs` with appropriate entries. 
```

```
  buster-btrfs:
    rootfs_type: debos
    debian_release: buster
    arch_list:
      - amd64
    extra_packages:
      - git 
      - autoconf 
      - automake 
      - gcc 
      - make 
      - pkg-config 
      - e2fslibs-dev 
      - libblkid-dev 
      - zlib1g-dev 
      - liblzo2-dev 
      - asciidoc 
      - xmlto 
      - libzstd-dev
      - python3-setuptools
      - python3.7-dev
    script: "scripts/buster-btrfs.sh"
    test_overlay: "overlays/btrfs"
```

> 2. We will look into last three config entries namely, `extra_packages`, `script` and `test_overlay`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will now look into last three config entries, namely: `extra_packages`, `script` and `test_overlay`.
```

>    `extra_packages` as name suggests it will add the listed packages from final rootfs image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. `extra_packages` as its name suggests will add the listed packages to the final rootfs image.
```

> 3. Remember `script` path is relative to `kci_rootfs build --data-path` value. By default its `jenkins/debian/debos/script`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. `script` is the path to an arbitrary script to run in the root file system.  This is typically used to build some test suites from source.  Remember that its path is relative to the `kci_rootfs build --data-path` value, which by default is `jenkins/debian/debos/script`
```

>    Here we need add new script named `buster-btrfs.sh`. Its a simple script to download the repo and build and install 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In this example, we need add new script named `buster-btrfs.sh`. It's a simple script to clone the repository, then build and install
```

   the btrfs-progs from source. 

```
$ cat jenkins/debian/debos/script/buster-btrfs.sh

> git clone https://github.com/kdave/btrfs-progs.git /btrfs-progs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
git clone --depth=1 https://github.com/kdave/btrfs-progs.git /btrfs-progs
```

cd /btrfs-progs
./autogen.sh && ./configure
make
make install
```

> 4. `test_overlay` option is used to create specific directory layout inside the rootfs image. In our case, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The `test_overlay` option is used to create specific directory layout inside the rootfs image. In our case: 
```

```
$ tree jenkins/debian/debos/overlays/btrfs/
jenkins/debian/debos/overlays/btrfs/
└── usr
    └── bin
        └── btrfs-verify-cli.sh
```

>    `/usr/bin/btrfs-verify-cli.sh` will be available on `buster-btrfs` rootfs image. These overlay scripts normally ran from LAVA job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   `/usr/bin/btrfs-verify-cli.sh` will be available in the `buster-btrfs` rootfs image. These overlay scripts are normally ran from a LAVA job.
```

```
$ cat jenkins/debian/debos/overlays/btrfs/btrfs-verify-cli.sh

cd  /btrfs-progs && TEST=001\* ./tests/cli-tests.sh
```

5. Make sure execute permission is applied on the scripts. 

```
chmod +x jenkins/debian/debos/overlays/btrfs/usr/bin/btrfs-verify-cli.sh
chmod +x jenkins/debian/debos/script/buster-btrfs.sh
```

> 6. Now build `buster-btrfs` rootfs image using kci_rootfs. 

Reviewer: It's probably worth adding a sample command here, something like this (untested):
```sh
./kci_rootfs build --arch=amd64 --rootfs-config=buster-btrfs
```

> 7. Once rootfs image is created, you can use it with appropriate kernel image. Make sure that kernel config has 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Once the rootfs image is created, you can use it with an appropriate kernel image and on a compatible target architecture (`amd64` for `x86_64` in this case). Make sure that the kernel config has 
```

   appropriate btrfs configs and other file system specific entries enabled. 

> 8. Add appropriate test entry with LAVA job definition for `btrfs-verify-cli.sh`. For example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Add appropriate test entry to the LAVA job definition in order to run `btrfs-verify-cli.sh`. For example,
```

Reviewer: About numbered list, I wonder if it's possible here to use the automatic Markdown mode by using `1.` for each item.  It might get reset to 1 with the extra formatted things in-between, but if this can work it will be easier to make changes in the future.

Author: right, if that works, its easier to make changes in later, this will be fine for someone who reads using browser. But for users who cloned this repo, it may be little inconvenient if they use text editors or commands like `less`. I think we can skip adding automatic markdown `1.` for now?

Reviewer: OK that's not a big deal, we can leave it as-is for now.  I think automatic numbering really makes sense for small lists, but this is a bit more complicated.

```
run:
    steps:
        - lava-test-case test-btrfs-cli-001 --shell ls /usr/bin/btrfs-verify-cli.sh

```

> If you like read more about LAVA job definition, please check [here](https://docs.lavasoftware.org/lava/writing-tests.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you like read more about LAVA job definition, please check the LAVA documentation part about [writing tests](https://docs.lavasoftware.org/lava/writing-tests.html)
```

### How to add tests to LAVA

#### Prerequisites

- Rootfs image is built 
- Rootfs image boots on a platform
- Tests can be run

> If you're facing issues with tha above you may want to go through the section "How to add test suite to a rootfs image"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're facing issues with the steps above, you may want to go through the section ["How to add test suite to a rootfs image"](#how-to-add-a-test-suite-to-a-rootfs-image)
```

Reviewer: I'm not 100% sure the anchor name will work but I think this can be turned into an internal hyperlink somehow.

> #### Adding new test plan to LAVA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Adding a new test plan for LAVA
```

Reviewer: The new test plan definition is actually added to the KernelCI definition, and it's using LAVA.

1. Use the rootfs image to boot the device and produce a LAVA job definition for the tests.
Upload rootfs image to kernelci-backend (storage)

```

> kci_rootfs upload --rootfs-dir /path/to/rootf/image/ --upload-path server/path --api http://api.kernelci --token KCI_API_TOKEN

Reviewer: Note: the `--api` and `--token` values can be put in the `kernelci.conf` config file rather than on the command line.

Also worth noting, most people won't have a token for `api.kernelci.org` (also the URL is broken in the example).  So maybe this can be replaced with something like `http://localhost:12345` with a comment to say the API needs to match the instance which the user has access to.

Reviewer: Also, we can mention the staging workflow where people can submit a PR with a new rootfs definition which will get built on staging and then production kernelci.org once merged.

```

Add rootfs definition to `test-configs.yaml`

```yaml

>   debian_buster-v4l2_ramdisk:

Reviewer: Following the example in the first part of this page, maybe it should be `debian_buster-btrfs` rather than `v4l2`?

Reviewer: Also it's really worth adding an example with nfsroot as it's easier to use initially.  Ramdisks typically mean optimising and fine-tuning the rootfs image to make it small enough.

    type: debian
    ramdisk: 'buster-v4l2/20200626.0/{arch}/rootfs.cpio.gz'
```

`ramdisk` path must be relative to storage server URL.

> Detailed description of the test configuration can be found [here](https://github.com/kernelci/kernelci-doc/wiki/Test-configurations)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Detailed description of the test configuration can be found on the [Test Configurations](https://github.com/kernelci/kernelci-doc/wiki/Test-configurations) page of the KernelCI wiki.
```

Reviewer: ToDo: The documentation about test configurations should be moved to kernelci-core markdown... but that's for another PR.

2. Add LAVA job definition template

> Create appropriate directory structure under `templates` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an appropriate directory structure under `templates` directory.
```

```

> mkdir templates/v4l2-compliance/

Reviewer: Again, maybe use the btrfs test as per the example in the first part of this page?

```

Create test plan definition

```
cat templates/v4l2-compliance/v4l2-compliance.jinja2
```

```yaml
- test:
    timeout:
      minutes: 10
    definitions:
    - repository:
        metadata:
          format: Lava-Test Test Definition 1.0
          name: {{ plan }}
          description: "v4l2 test plan"
          os:
          - debian
          scope:
          - functional
        run:
          steps:
          - /usr/bin/v4l2-parser.sh {{ v4l2_driver }}
      from: inline
      name: {{ plan }}
      path: inline/{{ plan }}.yaml
```

```
cat templates/v4l2-compliance/generic-qemu-v4l2-compliance-template.jinja2 
```

```
{% extends 'boot/generic-qemu-boot-template.jinja2' %}
{% block actions %}
{{ super () }}

{% include 'v4l2-compliance/v4l2-compliance.jinja2' %}

{% endblock %}

{%- block image_arg %}
        image_arg: '-kernel {kernel} -append "console={{ console_dev }},115200 root=/dev/ram0 debug verbose {{ extra_kernel_args }}"'
{%- endblock %}
```

3. Update `test-plans` section of `test-configs.yaml` with new test definition

> ```yaml

Reviewer: This one is a bit advanced because it's a variant with some parameters.  Maybe a simpler one which wouldn't need `pattern` and `params` would be better first to cover the regular cases, then showing an advanced example with details about extra options would be useful as a second step.

  v4l2-compliance-vivid:
    rootfs: debian_buster-v4l2_ramdisk
    pattern: 'v4l2-compliance/generic-qemu-v4l2-compliance-template.jinja2'
    params: {v4l2_driver: "vivid"}
    filters:
      - whitelist:
          defconfig:
            - 'defconfig+virtualvideo'
            - 'multi_v7_defconfig+virtualvideo'
```

> 4. Use `kci_build` to build the kernel and `kci_test` to run the tests in a LAVA lab.

Reviewer: This is entirely covered in the `kci_build` and `kci_test` pages.  It's fine to add some examples here again as it's convenient to show a full "story", but there should be links and mentions of the other pages for more detailed documentation.

Build the Kernel

```
kci_build build_kernel --kdir /path/to/linux --defconfig x86_64_defconfig+virtualvideo --arch x86_64 --build-env gcc-8 --verbose -j 4
```

Genrate test job definitions

```
kci_test generate --bmeta-json /path/to/bmeta.json --dtbs-json /path/to/artifacts/dtbs.json --lab-json /path/to/mgalka-lava-local.json --storage http://storage.kernelci --lab your-lab-name --user lava_user --token LAVA_API_TOKEN --output /output/path --callback-id your-lava-callback-name --callback-url http://api.kernelci
```

Submit test jobs

```
kci_test submit --lab your-lab-name --user lava_user --token LAVA_API_TOKEN --jobs /path/to/generated/test/job/definitions
```

> 5. Create PR to add the test plan

Reviewer: Please add a paragraph here to explain what this is about, to send the test plan upstream in KernelCI and have it used on kernelci.org.  It's related to the comment I put earlier about creating new rootfs images, with a PR this can be done on staging.  Also, some people will be using their own instance of KernelCI and won't need to make a PR.
